%!TEX root = main.tex

\chapter{Evaluation}
In this chapter we conclude our work by looking at the goals defined in the introduction, and evalutes the results. As well as evalutes the structured literature review. Section \ref{sec:futurework} contains our thoughts on future implementation and improvements of our solution.

\subsection{Evaluation of the structured literature review}
A large part of this project has been dedicated to the structured literature
review, henceforth referred to as the \textit{SLR}. While the SLR process went
mostly as planned, with few process-specific problems, the results were hugely
lacking and the process required an extraordinate amount of time.

The key problems we have identified were a lack of experience, lack of
leadership, lack of domain knowledge and a young domain.

The lack of experience should be fairly obvious, as SLR isn't very commonly
used in computer science. We were given an article on SLR that described the
process and need for it, but lack of practical experience among the
participants was very evident. For example was there disagreements on what
would constitute valid sources for articles, since a lot of relevant literature
was not published in peer-reviewed journals. The lack of
experience with SLR also lead to it taking a long time to concretize the goals
of the review itself into search terms.

The lack of leadership stemmed from being several independent groups with
independent goals (each group is graded individually). This meant that 12
individuals needed to argue to consensus for all decisions, since noone could
or would take on a leadership role.

Lack of domain knowledge was because a large part of the group had little to no
experience with neither the game itself (StarCraft) nor the design of software
architectures for game-playing agents. This meant that concretizing search
terms took much longer than needed, and that the search terms had to be decided
too early, before people had been able to read up on domain knowledge, which
lead to a sub-optimal searching process. This was partially reflected in the
results, because many of the highly rated articles were mostly useless.

Another problematic area is what we briefly touched on earlier, is that much of
the literature is not published in journals or academically recognized sources.
This is because StarCraft: Brood War agents is a relatively new area of
research, and many of the participants are simply programmers who do this for
fun in their spare time. This means that much of the literature describing the
state of the art simply doesn't exist, or only exists as blog posts or similar.
This makes searching for relevant literature hard when one has to stay within
the relatively strict boundaries defined by the SLR. On the other hand,
research into cognition is also a relatively young interest field, and the
amount of recent and valuable literature regarding about is not impossible for a
single person to sift through, and it would have been more efficient than
splitting up the work like with the SLR. The indication for this is that only a
handful of the relevant papers we based our eventual report on turned up in the
SLR, and all the relevant papers that turned up in the SLR we were familiar
with beforehand.

\section{Conclusion}
We have designed a modular architecture for a computer program that can play the
game StarCraft: Brood War, based on a cognitive architecture, emulating some of
the cognitive processes in the human mind. This was based on an exploration of
the problem of playing StarCraft: Brood War, a study of existing agents, and
also a review of relevant literature.

We have also briefly described some of the modules that would need to be
implemented in an agent.

\subsection{Evaluation of goals}
\subsubsection{Identify the most important aspects of a StarCraft match}
We have described the game play of a StarCraft: Brood War match, and what the
major problems are for an intelligent agent that wants to play it.
\subsubsection{Research existing solution and theories, using a structured
literature review}
The conclusion of the structured literature review lead to a large amount of
high-relevancy papers that needed to be read through, which we did, and then
selected what we thought was relevant to our paper.
\subsubsection{Design an architecture for a modular StarCraft playing computer
program}
Our previously described architecture is an attempt to bridge the domain of
real-time strategy games, and StarCraft: Brood War in particular, with the
model of cognitive processing that has been explored earlier.


\section{Evaluation}
We believe that using cognitive models is interesting both from a
game-development perspective, for more realistic and engaging gameplay, as well
as from a purely academic viewpoint, furthering the understanding of cognitive
models, and giving researchers yet another environment and domain in which to
test cognitive models.

Since we haven't implemented and tested the performance of our proposed
architecture, we have to rely on the testing done by others done in different
domains for estimating how efficient our agent will be. It is not given that the
single-focus approach taken by a cognitive architecture will be optimal for
something that would intuitively seem to require thinking about multiple things
at the same time. But we believe that the combination of unconscious processes
and the acknowledge-dispatch approach to handling threats and areas requiring
attention will lead to the agent being able to efficiently handle multi-pronged
problems.

\section{Impact}


\section{Future work}
\label{sec:futurework}
The biggest part remaining is to actually implement this architecture, and see
if it is viable. This will include more closely detailing the various
specialized processors in each layer, as well as elaborating on the meta-goals
for the core layer, and implementing a rule set to describe these.

Another important extension would be to more tightly integrate learning into
the architecture. Inspiration for how to do this could possibly be done by
looking at how it is implemented in the LIDA model\cite{franklin2007lida}.